um
i'm curious though how come uh you're
here or what's the um
what's your particular interest in this
in this class
are people here because they know of ed
sanders his work
or how many here know his work already
as uh how many know it as from
i know of him as a poet
and how how many know of him from the
thugs
so you know you're pretty most are
pretty familiar with this is there
anyone here who has not heard any of his
work but is just interested in the
concept investigative poetics
which is in itself interesting yeah
we came to the right place uh
the the notion of investigative poetics
is
something i think that ed invented
out of the work of other people before
him and out of his own uh
wit and um experience in the political
movements of the late 50s and early 60s
he was one of the first
pacifist activist anti-war
um
[Music]
performers uh he came from the catholic
worker movement
originally and worked with dorothy day
back in
the late 50s i think he was originally
from uh
kansas city and got turned on
by uh howell i think actually
in a lot of beat literature and then
uh decided to come to new york and see
the big bohemian village
and then immediately got involved
because he was sort of
scholarly to begin with he got involved
with uh classical studies so that he can
read egyptian hieroglyphs
as well as greek and latin such a
scholar
and um he got an activist he got
involved with the
swimming out and climbing on top of the
first polaris submarines
in new london harbor back in 1960 so
he's actually been on the spot
sort of been awake and on the spot and
naked in the ocean of actuality for some
time
then in 19 when i was in india
in 63
62. i hadn't um heard of him or anything
but
i got uh rumors uh and then a letter
from him
about rumors of and a letter from him
about his magazine which is called [ __ ]
you
slash bar a magazine of the arts which
is
at the time such a funny notion and bold
because nobody had gone that far in the
title to be so overtly
iconoclastic and comical and it's at the
same time very elegantly because there's
a [ __ ] you slash bar
it's like an olsen poem or something and
then a magazine of the arts
not [ __ ] you a magazine uh
now i keep seeing it actually vulgarly
described as ed sanders's magazine [ __ ]
you
but it's not that it was [ __ ] you slash
bar a magazine of the arts
so everybody got turned on by that who
was
everybody in say the san francisco or
the black mountain or the new york
school
who were wondering what was the next
step after the
the big poetry renaissance that was
solidified by don allen's anthology
of 1960 that was recommended to you
today
for the projective earth text
and i think ed provided the next big
impetus
from the sort of academic classical
accomplishment of
literary revolution to like another push
into the 60s
with that title of total frankness and
humor so it was a humor or
like mind zap
not only on the poets but on uh the
readership and uh on readers and on
professors because
his idea was to have [ __ ] you a magazine
of the arts with contributions by olsen
and robert duncan and denise levertoff
and
myself and peter olofsky and leroy jones
so that would be absolutely necessary
for all bibliophiles and university
libraries to order [ __ ] you a magazine
of the yards
unless they miss out on this item which
is now worth
like 200 a copy for for the first issue
and
he knew it and they knew it that that
was like um
so he was taking advantage of the
cultural situation and of the
with a great deal of confidence in the
um
fact that it was like uh a wave of the
future or
a wave of the present that was that was
a cresting
a wave of frankness uh
humor uh
mental revolution or consciousness
revolution a revolution of words
certainly
and his concept was word zap
that is a a sort of psychedelic or mind
manifesting notion
that the word could zap your mind or zap
your brain and actually make brain
changes or neurological changes
or changes of perception
ultimately changes of uh behavior thus
changes of history
make changes in history and actually his
word
was zap you know that word zap which is
used a lot
and gossip columns are even out of the
white house now
uh that that uh that verb the use of
that verb was sanders contribution in
in his early limar newsletters which he
edited
or [ __ ] you a magazine of the arts um
he had a whole bunch of little um
mimi graft quasi-political
quasi-literary
activist publications which emanated
from
a backyard
back house on avenue way between 12th
and 13th
street in the lower east side
which oddly enough i can see at present
from my kitchen window from an apartment
where i
live in new york
i think he moved there in sixty
two or three or something uh and set up
the peace i book shop
on 10th street between avenue b
and avenue c which was about a half a
block from where i was living
so that we were neighbors
and that was the beginning
of the amphetamine crisis so there are a
lot of amphetamine heads hanging around
his bookshop because it had an egyptian
horus
eye on the window and the amphetamine
heads of that ear were
naturally attracted to anything that
looked a little bit mystical
particularly on an old an old butcher
shop which had hebrew kosher lettering
on it
renamed pisa with an egyptian sign
but one thing that was weird about it
was that the place kept
you couldn't tell whether it was a speed
freaks or undercover police the pl
the place kept getting ransacked or
i think once burned out and a few times
ransacked and busted into
and there are all sorts of goons
occasionally hanging out
posing as hell's angels
or as uh peace i uh nude nicks or
enforcers peace enforcers or
uh wandering itinerant minstrel gorillas
or whatever but a mixture of weird riff
raff and juvenile delinquents as well as
thule kopferberg
or myself or peter olofsky or frank
o'hara or leroy jones
coming by because he had a good
bookstore carrying all the city lights
books and all the totem corinth books
and all of
back copies of eugene magazine all the
little
uh uh iconography of the late 50s
poetic poetic and prose revolution
plus a lot of marxist analysis
of the rockefeller interests whatever
material that was around
of left-wing newspapers or
masses and mainstream publications or
what later became i guess was it nakhla
nacla
does anybody know that national what's
the
yeah i i think a harvard-based um
research group cambridge based research
group
run by a guy named michael claire and
others i think is working in it
who are like advanced intellectual
marxists
who did real research into
say honeywell
and it's corporate structure and it's
it's napalm products or
nav home-like products or dow chemical
or
into the rockefeller uh empire in latin
america
so there was a um so they had all the
little nacula books or pre-natural books
and
there's a whole variety of literature
which never got
carried very clearly or extensively in
the university book
book shops around columbia or nyu which
you can find now in the little red
maoist
book shops all over berkeley or chicago
or new york
i don't know if there's one around here
no is there any place where you can get
that kind of political analysis
literature here yeah the big cities you
can and it's useful actually
i used to go around whenever i gave a
poetry reading
carrying with me i think it was nakhla
or some similar organization that put
out
a book on the
military contracts that universities had
so every time i'd hit like illinois
state or normal illinois or
some little little little university
town i could always look up in the book
and find out well this
this has a contract to research uh
jellied petroleum to spread on ocean
waves so that sailors who were torpedo
couldn't swim
would be burned or
this uh the battal institute in
cleveland i guess had a contract
to um well then the mathematics
department had a contract to
determine the arc or curve
that a projectile might take if you were
firing it from
100 miles at sea onto a jungle or
or if you were weighting it down with
thousands of little pellets so it would
bust out and defoliate an area the size
of a football field
what kind of um whether it would be
better for it to come straight down or
whether it become come
at a 30 degree angle or something well
you know
there was a lot of technical information
that was researched
by radical scholars who weren't part of
the
establishment academic structure in the
sense that they could not get government
or
private grants to research such matters
and so i had to collect money from rich
hippie radical millionaires
to finance those projects and so there's
a very vast
variety of sort of semi-underground but
high-class scholarly literature so ed
sanders carried all that in the pci
bookstore
but we noticed that the place kept
getting busted uh the police kept coming
in looking for grass
around 1964 5.
uh chasing people uh trying to plant
heroin
there's always was some problem we got a
little paranoid thinking about
it's just the local narcs or it couldn't
be a big plot against us
or it couldn't possibly be directed from
washington or uh
how could we prove it anyway that that
it that we were being persecuted
or that he was being persecuted and once
there was a break-in into his uh
he had that little apartment in the rear
of um
through an alleyway had to walk through
an alley on
uh avenue a into the backyard and then
into a little old stone
a brick a brick three-story
cold water apartment where he had a
three-room
flat where he kept copies of [ __ ] you a
magazine of the arts
and um i think his
set of poems called peace eye that city
lights
published and uh
limar newsletter which he edited
legalized marijuana because actually he
started
that that too with michael aldrich from
buffalo
around in the early 60s they started a
limar which was research
into the law and into the history and
sociology of the
marijuana repression and they circulated
that information
with little literary essays by burroughs
or myself or
charles olson on the subject
all in a sense investigative poetics
uh making use of all the new
uh um rhythm and blues rock and roll
beating
zap language uh
with the slogan total assault on the
culture
i guess you've heard that
the reason i'm talking about all this is
um
setting up the stage there were
a break-in there was a break-in into his
house
and where he kept all this stuff and all
his magazines and the
files and mimeograph stuff was
so something was stolen a lot of was
thrown around on the floor
and at first we thought well maybe it's
meth heads that resented him
or maybe it was local narcs or but who
was it
so it turns out years later this year i
went to washington
to visit a lawyer friend ira lowe
who was the lawyer for
a lot of the peace demonstrators in
67 during the levitation of the pentagon
assembly in washington you've heard of
that i guess
which sanders took part of something was
in fact
sanders was performed the main ritual
exorcism
with the sound truck and the thugs and i
think uh kenneth anger who
was angry at uh sanders for
for uh his political
exorcism for some reason or other i
think kenneth anger being an s
m film diabolist
thought that it was the wrong tactics to
to try and exercise the pentagon and so
was exercising
sanders from underneath the soundtrack
um and sanders had also found that the
was one of the founders of the yippie
movement with abbey hoffman and
jerry rubin and uh guy named keith lampe
who was the head of one of the heads of
veterans
vietnam veterans or veterans for peace a
veterans group
forgot which lampy later went moved to
the west and became ponderosa pine as
spokesman for the
trees of california as a deeper form
of cultural uh readjustment than just
protests against the war
starting with tarthang toku now chanting
mantra
in berkeley
well so ira lowe who had been the lawyer
for a bunch of people at the pentagon
demonstration who i think been the
lawyer that got male or never all the
other people out of jail
during that that situation or that
the siege of the pentagon what is it
what
says the name of his book the siege of
miami and mailer's book
pardon me armies of the night yeah well
when mailer was one of the
members of that army of the night he got
busted and ireland was his lawyer
and there was a whole group of
lawyers in washington that were radicals
helped out
so i've been uh working with ira low the
last few years getting my papers under
the freedom of information act
my papers from the cia the fbi
um the drug
enforcement agency the treasury
department the customs department
army intelligence navy intelligence
there are about 25 agencies if you want
to get your papers you
have to really need a technical
knowledge and a lawyer in many many
duplicate letters to be sent out to each
one of the agencies with plus follow-ups
plus forms filled out
so i got my papers lo was working on
papers for
jane fonda and for um
tom hayden so he was getting money for
that and then then he
offered to get mine free so i paid a
couple hundred dollars for
court costs and he brought got me packs
of stuff within a year
and then he got ed's papers too and also
um
we we were talking over we thought it'd
be interesting if you would get leroy
jones's papers
you know and actually get the literary
field covered
a little bit so we have papers from
leroy jones from myself from ed
well all this preliminary stuff about
ed's apartment
and being busted into was
background for the fact that this year
rogue showed me a piece of paper saying
that
um when in 1964 or five
when ed was um living on avenue way
actually there was a little report from
an fbi agent saying
surveillance was maintained across the
street from ed sanders apartment
on a 24-hour basis and the subject was
reported to leave at 1pm
and to take his car and drive it to some
other place and
go to the grocery store and
stayed there for a full half hour and
then
walked back by foot and carrying bags of
groceries
stopping around avenue c on the way
so actually it wasn't paranoia
all the way from washington there were
these filaments of uh
of electrical information uh uh
going down to uh
ed who was just a funny guy actually
just sort of a
comic writer in a way siri a serious
comic writer
so actually um the government had more
mimeograph machines than we did is what
it boiled down to and more telephones
and more
uh writers than we did than the literary
people did there were more people are
type writers
more secretaries more agents
more activists than we did and i think
most of the activists were
followed and um
their work was checked on um houses were
robbed
or forged letters were written to
screw them up
i've added the only the only i haven't
seen his whole file it was just that one
little thing which really astounded me
because i thought he was such an
innocent guy peace eye bookstore in the
lower east side
limar and [ __ ] you a magazine of the
arts and they actually
had a whole core of trained agents
following him around
so well i i haven't seen his whole file
it was just we just showed me that one
thing because i was actually the reason
i was interested
was i suggested that ira lowe get ed's
papers because
i remembered back in the early 60s there
was this breaking into his house and
that's illegal
and so that's sort of like a smoking
pistol and if that was
fbi or a local red squad then probably
it would be in the papers
and it's so long ago that they probably
wouldn't have covered it up
you know being his papers being his
files and they probably wouldn't have
covered it up because the agents who did
it probably moved on to some other
bureau
and when the slip of paper came in to
get these files it wouldn't be anybody
directly connected who would hide it
um i don't know what um what was turned
and there's also outside statue of
limitations but i don't know what was
turned up actually
it was just that since i told irelow why
don't you check that era
he pulled out this paper saying yes it's
really true he was being covered
the government was really covering him
at that time well
what's interesting was what was ed's
activity
it was really investigative poetics in
the sense of
in the dope area he was checking the gov
he was probing into the government
bureaucracies and making public
um uh information making information to
the public
through the medium of poetry or some
literary magazine or some
freak out zap extravaganza
language manifestos but he was doing
like
his style was dada
or old-fashioned american pamphlets here
tom payne
uh village crank um
uh petr cevsky circle
pre-revolutionary russian anarchist
hidden in the with a basement mimeograph
machine
and one thing he kept noticing was that
the government or the the
fbi and nixon and all and
mitchell and
all the earlier fbi people had read all
these big books about the russian
revolution
and took it very seriously when there
was a group of three or four people with
a minigraph machine in their basement
because that's how revolutions actually
do begin
you know just a couple of guys with a
mimeograph machine and a funny idea and
you got to watch them otherwise you know
they'll grow like a big cancer and take
over after a while
so that was a paranoia of the government
dealing with the uh paranoia critical
style of humor
that's a phrase of dolly paranoic
critical style
of humor of the i guess late beatnik
style
sanders
so uh i have well the point i'm making
is that
the poetic probing that he did was uh
sufficiently precise that it touched a
nerve somewhere and so
just as he was investigating the
government the government was
investigating him
in not only investigating but
manipulating like
probably breaking into his
offices and turning files upside down
so over the through the 60s he and i and
our various others got more and more
interested in investigating the
government
and uh illegal activities of the
government and that's part
one aspect of what he means by
investigative poetry i think
so what i want to do with this period is
just talk about what i understand of his
notion of investigative poetry
and the things that we've done in common
um
maybe touching on some things that he'll
go into in more extensive detail but
just give my angle
on on the same so i want to begin with
a sample or a poem
[Music]
um
uh this is something that i did that ed
approves of or encouraged
uh then i actually got a little bit out
of it it's a song
it started the thugs a rock group which
also began
uh in the 60s and early 60s about at the
same time as a piece i
in 64 the thugs
would rehearse at the peace i bookstore
and that was um
people that worked in the holy model
rounders later uh
weber to the kupferberg soloist
ed soloist a couple of other peoples
that turned up in uh
you know their that i keep seeing now in
other bands people who play with joni
mitchell or uh
hang around the other end in new york
apparently he was able to get a hold of
a lot of good musicians
to back up the amateur poet singers of
the thugs
and i remember one of his early
interesting songs was police state
and as he was taking uh that he was
taking that kind of
literary political material and
investing it into pop songs and rock
songs
and making total assault on the culture
making a real combine of
high culture and
low police low life or
doping low life
hypnosis so
he was one of the first that um
introduced actual politics into the um
into into rock music and it actually
affected a lot of
a lot of the other uh rock musicians
because when he was playing in
greenwich village in a little theater i
remember
paul mccartney came and um
people from the stones band
um there were other musicians who were
commercially better
set up but who were really curious and
interested in seeing
the sophistication and intelligence and
obvious high
value quality of what uh sanders was
doing in terms of body movements as well
as language
so uh then later on i got into writing
pop songs so the fruition of this
is cia dope calypso which will be coming
out on columbia records this fall
in 1945
china was won by mao zedong
chiang kai-shek's army ran away and
they're waiting there in
thailand today supported by the c.i.a
pushing down thailand away
first they stole from the mio tribes
up in the hills they started taking
bribes
then they sent their soldiers out to
shan
collecting opium to sell to the man
pushing junk in bangkok today
supported by the c.i.a
brought their jam on mule trains down to
chiang rai
that's a railroad town sold it next
to police chief brain he took it to town
on the choo-choo train trafficking
bangkok all day supported by
the cia the policeman's name was
mr fowle he peddled dope grand scale and
how
chief of the border customs paid by
central intelligences usaid
the whole operation newspaper say
supported by the c.i.a
he got so sloppy and he peddled too
loose
he busted himself and he cooked his own
goose
took the reward for an opium load
seizing
[Music]
the whole operation fell into chaos
till u.s intelligence came into laos
i tell you no lie i'm a true american
our big pusher there was for me
all them princes in the power play but
for me was the man for the c.i.a
big fat men like to dine into lynch
prince of the meows he grew black mud
kill
opium flowed through the land like a
flood
[Music]
army like a sacred cow helicopter
smugglers built long chains bars
in zang clang province on the plane of
jars
it started in secret they were fighting
yesterday
contestant secret army of the cia
all through the 60s the dope flew free
through
ten sun hood saigon to marshall
their america followed through
transporting cochlear for president
two all these dealers were decades
yesterday the indo-chinese mob of the
uscia
operation haylift officer william colby
saw marshall keith ryopium
mr mustard told me in the china desk he
was chief of dirty tricks
hitchhiking with good pushers was how he
got a fix
subsidizing traffickers to drive the
reds away
till colby was the head of the homework
c.i.a
subsidizing traffickers to drive the
reds away
[Music]
was
well actually that's a product of uh
our collaboration with that over long or
you know
mutual collaboration with that over a
long period of time or mutual exchange
of ideas and
turning each other on to possibilities
of
poetry poetics as well as possibilities
of investigation
i'll talk a little bit about that
particular thing um
that song is from first blues which is a
book of songs
i put out a couple years ago and is the
byproduct
of maybe 15 or 20 years of preoccupation
with the whole dope problem
and research into it related to literary
matters oddly enough
or inextricable from literary cultural
research to begin with
it all started when hanging around times
square in the 40s
as described in burrows as junkie
and in my preface to it which is around
in the library
i realized that the official government
version
of what marijuana was like and my own
experience and my friend's experience
was like two different universes
because at that time 1945 46
you got to remember that it was really a
question of
dope fiend and it was like really
terrible like
public [ __ ] or something like
something awful you know like
the the idea of grass marijuana was so
in such bad repute people the the
official propaganda was that it sent you
straight to the mad house
i guess you you know you know about that
historically don't you i mean
there's been enough reruns of the old
reefer madness movies of the 30s
uh so i couldn't figure out how that
could be how people could
how it could be so disjointed and by
doing just a
little bit of research i realized that
there really was a conspiracy
and another a misunderstanding as big as
that could not have come about
without an enormous amount of money and
effort and energy
being put into a campaign of public
education that would
distort people's ideas and so i began
actually
doing a little bit of research on it
in the 40s and found that one of the
first big things i found was that
governor
that mayor laguardia of new york had had
a report on marijuana made which said it
was all right
gave marijuana a clean bill of health
only
ten years earlier in 1938
the same year that congress was
illegalizing it
so i realized it had been a political
struggle
then doing further research into the
whole history of the
narcotics bureau i realized it was a
case of parkinson's law
that a bureau like a government
bureaucracy like that tends to find more
and more work for itself
and tries to extend its power and take
over more and more territory
and then i began thinking well what
about the junkies then so i began
researching that and that research goes
back
that is that the roots of that problem
go back to world war 1 and 1918
1920 the harrison act and you find out
that before that junkies were not
considered as dope fiends but just
medical problem
and that a a gang of doctors in new york
state who had a
private clinic who wanted to make money
had legislation
passed in new york state making it
illegal for doctors to prescribe
uh heroin that had to be done in their
life they're licensed in registered
clinics
so they made a lot of money on it it was
like a
a um a group of people who wanted a
little monopoly
on the commerce and then there was a guy
representative volkl got up in congress
who denounced denounced it as a
conspiracy by a group of doctors to make
money
by getting a sort of franchise on all
the heroin cures
in their upstate new york
rest homes and then there was a big
fight and then
they the treasury department
stepped in um and closed down
government clinics in uh which are like
the british system now
where you can go if you're junkie go and
get like the methadone system
now closed down all the clinics in new
orleans
cutting off advising and cut off of
federal funds
and drove all the junkies on the street
where the junkies then began
robbing and stealing to get money for
their
fix and that led to the idea of a junkie
as a criminal and that was reinforced by
treasury department men going out
busting him with guns
so pretty soon like a circular system
had been set up and uh then a lot of
doctors protested
the the government intervention in the
patient doctor relationship
so uh there was then
a an attack on the doctors by the
treasury department and something like
20 000 doctors were busted
for trying to do regular medical
treatment for junkies
and a number of
enormous amount paid fines and about 3
000 went to jail
yeah pardon me
the harrison act was a 1918
1920 i think that was the original law
that forbid well that began regulating
junkies
junk remain regulating the sale of
heroin and opiates
no it was of that time though
of the time of prohibition of that same
nature
i think the provisions were
some sort of technical provision that a
doctor
had to be licensed to
prescribe for addiction
a special license beyond that he had to
have a license from the treasury
department
a uh an opiate license from the treasury
so the treasury department took over the
licensing
of the medical profession in this area
that really weird actually remember
see think of how weird it is anyway that
the treasury department should have
control of drugs
you know you take it for granted but
when you think historically how did that
ever happen
well it goes back to this situation the
um
anslinger i thought was the head of the
treasury department um
narcotics control board and i think he
had originally worked in prohibition
in the alcohol control actually i've
forgotten half of all
this
things oh it was up to 1918 it was a
regular commercial thing you get a
snake oil remedies or in drugstores
laudanum perigoric opioid tincture of
opium you could buy
there are a number of junkies illegal
junkies old ladies or
young who would have their lord in them
every day and
maybe a hundred thousand or a half
million just like now
same thing except there was no fuss
about it it was just sort of like aunt
minnie
is going upstairs to take her lord and
then she'll retire for the evening but
she'll be down tomorrow morning and cook
breakfast
you can get the history of all this in a
couple really good books
um see america's
drug hang-up 50 years of folly
written by rufus king
who was former chairman of the american
bar association american medical
station association joint committee on
narcotics policy
a very intelligent guy and that's the
best
uh historical survey
of the uh
build-up of the narcotics bureaucracy
and of narcotics politics
america's drug hang up 50 years of folly
rufus king and another good book is
the addict and the law by
alfred r linda smith uh indiana
university press
those are the early pioneers in all this
research
there's lots of other books now but i
haven't kept up with the literature they
were the early breakthrough books
actually
and i guess lester greenspoon's book on
marijuana probably has some of the early
history
well all this is simply to say that um
there was some kind of vast and
large-scale
weird conspiracy to
interfere with people's lives to
interfere with the doctor doctor-patient
relationship to
to tell [ __ ] to stop smoking grass or
tell white people to stop imitating the
[ __ ] smoking grass
for whatever reason
it entered into the poetry world because
there's this old tradition of teophil
gautier and the club of ashishin
the hashishin's club or arthur rambo
and paul verlin french poets of the
1870s taking hashish
both theirs writings on hashish
coleridge on
writing kubla khan
in an opium dream thomas d quinces
confessions of an opiometer
they're um
[Music]
anti uh antique vedas written about soma
all sorts of aboriginal literature as
well as anthropological literature as
well as yellow decades
1890 literature by havelock ellis or
edward carpenter or william james
dealing with anesthetic revelations so
a drug uh dilettantism has always been
some little element of literary history
and the most romantic and interesting
parts the french decadent writers in the
uh
1840s uh
french literary society with uh gautier
and uh
de la cua and baudelaire and real
high-minded people all of a sudden you
have these if you're a poet in 1940s 50s
america you have all these real
interesting
poets and their backgrounds but you find
there's this huge police
police condition in this area and so
naturally you want to find out what
those poets were into
so almost every poet in the 40s and 50s
who particularly those who were
influenced by rambo which is like 100
really from from uh jack kerouac to
patty smith
they all wanted to know what kind of
ashy charambo was taking naturally what
knew as barros said
or what it was like to take opium or
just the natural inquisitiveness and
curiosity
of a poet or a writer or of just a of a
vision seeker
or smart kid or
or old bohemian or
[Music]
elegant [ __ ] or
a strong-minded macho hemingway
who would also want to know what kind of
opium
was being used by the bull fighters if
they were using it
i mean it just just natural natural that
you'd want to know what was going on
behind the scenes
and yet there was this enormous police
condition in this area that was
unnatural especially if you read history
and so that they actually
1840 theofield gautier and baudelaire
and other people belong to a club where
they'd meet every week and take ashish
and
write poems or something like what's
going on now you can't do that you got
to go to jail
so obviously then then you scratch the
surface and you see the laguardia report
which says there's nothing wrong with
marijuana
then you go down to times square and you
see all these big hoodlum looking cops
busting
people for smoking grass or carrying it
or trying to sell it and you realize
there's something really weird going on
and then you see all the junkies
shuttering down the street and
with their noses dripping and stealing
your overcoat and
wonder what led to that condition why
the police are so mad at them
when they should be sending them to a
doctor
and then you begin realizing that uh
the plainclothes detectives are actually
selling
heroin uh in um
that the intel if you do a little more
research you realize that the head of
the
narcotics bureau's intelligence agency
or the special investigative squad
is actually got a working relationship
with organized crime in the mafia
and then you do a little bit of more
work and you realize historically if you
look up newspaper clippings that
every decade they bust the entire
narcotics bureau for pedaling
and then you do a little more research
and say you're involved in the war and
the
anti-war activity in vietnam and you
hear rumors that air america is
transporting heroin
transporting opium for the cia
and then you get all involved with
further research and then as you go into
deeper and deeper you see that
somehow or other there's a working
relationship between the mafia organized
crime and the
dope bureaucracies and the secret police
intelligence bureaucracies and it's all
mixed into one
pottage and so you have somebody like ed
sanders from the other side
who's got the lemar newsletter and total
assault on the culture
and league for sexual freedom and [ __ ]
you a magazine of the arts
and junkies liberation movement
uh and uh thugs singing police state
and um it's all sort of becomes one
large paranoiic system
a big paranoia projection
got that on tape the whole study
finally leads you to the conclusion that
it's just a big paranoia projection and
maybe you're crazy or maybe they're
crazy or maybe you're all crazy together
then you begin getting angry and
paranoid maybe they're following you
and uh who did they kill last time and
whose house are they breaking into now
so it's a dangerous field to get into
unless you have something to balance and
stabilize your mind
which is why it's very useful to have
this sort of subject taught
surrounded by zen masters and tibetan
llamas and
[Laughter]
uh where the where there's the was it
where there's a recourse to emptiness
in the middle of it all where you can
always have recourse to meditation to
calm your anxieties and
to to empty the paranoia out so that the
the paranoia becomes another playful toy
or poetic
fancy rather than something that you
really have to get worried about and
hide in a basement
basement like the invisible man
so that as ed will point out the danger
of investigative poetics
is uh that your natural paranoia will
take over and then
underneath that the cause of that is
actually just
anger really or aggression
maybe some fixated ideas on your own ego
identity and your own goodness and the
badness of other people that you're good
and other people are evil
and that the evil people are taking over
the good people
and if only you are strong enough and
keep keep track of all the evil people
you can take them up to the new york
times supreme court
and get them more busted through the
washington post
and clear up all and all the sins will
be cleared up and everything will come
back to normal which is what ezra pound
was into except he thought it was all
the banking system
that was just as i was saying it's all
the drug system so pound thought it was
a banking system
in the cantos he's got an analysis of
money and his point is that as money
is used as a commodity rather than
merely
some measure of exchange but as money is
used
to make money like the bank loans out
money at a high rate of interest to get
more money
that this abuse of the medium of
exchange
is what poisons the entire economy when
money is loaned out not for productive
for for to encourage socially useful
production
but is loaned out to make more money for
the loaner
or the bank then some natural unbalances
is entered right into the bloodstream so
to speak or the
the the most delicate part of the
nervous system of social communication
the the the symbol of exchange the money
so pound went into giant research into
the history of banks
back to medici banks and back to roman
banks and
communal banks where there was no
question of getting money for money it
was just sort of a
very small rate of interest and money
was loaned out for only for
useful production and uh came up with
an entire analysis announced of the
entire society based on money
which became his obsession for until he
was 80
until until he got so close to death he
realized that
well it wasn't really money it was greed
so he should have been working on
people's minds in psychology rather than
the externalized banking system because
that was just a manifestation of greed
um and so he felt that his whole life
and all his work
pound finally felt all his life and work
was
a mess uh stupidity and ignorance all
the way through
himself at the age of 80.
so i was just pointing out some of the
dangers of investigative poetics
um
for uh for my own obsession with dope
police state the dope police i've
sort of concluded research on that in
about 1971
and presented a paper at the
institute for policy research in
washington which is published in a book
called allen verbatim
with myriad footnotes and references and
it sort of it was a climax of my
obsessional preoccupation with that
subject and i sort of got out of it
since then
having sort of laid it down on paper
but uh it forms the basis for a number
of references
and songs and poems
um that uh that i published
as poems rather than as prose and i'd
rather not go on and on more with it now
i just sort of started going into it and
i
found myself going back into the same
compulsive wrap
going back to 1918 which you have to
finally pull all the different parts of
your knowledge and all the
historical references together and can
go on for days and days and days and any
one of you who's
been involved with somebody obsessed
with the assassination committees or
whether kennedy was killed by sirhan or
oswald or ruby or
santo trafficante or you've heard it all
i guess
haven't you so i'll read a poem on that
subject
next um
in which uh finally i try to get it all
together but in a poetic form
so the whole point of investigative
poetics i guess
is how do you take all that material
like pounds
obsessive accumulation of data on roman
banking systems
and long boring accounts of chinese
production and equity and
renaissance banks how do you find a way
of putting it into
putting it concisely on the page so that
people don't get bored and start saying
like
you know you know walking around with an
albatross of this idea around your neck
how do you pres i think
sanders phrase is how do you present
data clusters
how do you deal with how do you dress up
or present or
data clusters in a way that the
information that you
think is crucial will get across to the
intellectual reader but also to the
general public
and at the same time be pretty
and at the same time last thousand years
so it's like it's not boring
see so it's not boring so it's still
good you know like um
still got some kind of poetry in it how
do you make poetry out of all these
facts
and as a as the world gets bigger and
more complicated and bureaucratized and
socialized or communized or capitalized
or cia eyes then it gets more to the
extent that poet does deal with history
it gets more important
as time goes on actually to be a master
of facts and to be involved in such
matters
but at the same time it gets more and
more unimportant because it's more and
more boring and more and more detailed
and routine
and obsessional and anybody can do it
and it's the daily newspaper and if you
get really into it you're cutting up all
the daily newspaper
and keeping clipping services that refer
to everything and interconnect and you
know it can be done better by ibm but
who's going to program
but who's going to program the ibm to
take care of it and find the results
you're looking for which is that the cia
killed kennedy because they were
connected
with the cuban heroin pushers who are
now living in tampa
and we're also dealing dope out of
saigon
well you have to com you'd have to get a
computer programmer who would
search out all the files and get it get
get all that data together
well anyway here's my um i'll start with
a um
this poem is called how to be playing on
the jukebox
dealing with what do you do with data
clusters may 30th 1975
3 am i was up late at night worried
about this whole problem
3 a.m 75.
had to be playing on the jukebox had to
be flashing like the daily double
how to be playing on tv how to be
loud-mouthed on the comedy hour
how to be announced over loud speakers
had to be said
in old ladies language cia and mafia are
in cahoots had to be said in old ladies
language
how to be said in american headlines i
guess i started that way because uh
i had an old lady friend 80 years old
that i visited
down around the lower east side it was a
family friend
was living by herself and she was an old
radical red communist from the 20s and
30s
she knew my mother and i went to her to
show her how smart i was and said well
you know those
the dope isn't so bad and she said well
all these young people always smoking
marijuana they should be having
revolutions
and i said well dope isn't so bad at
least a revolution and besides those she
realizes the cia and the fbi and blah
blah blah are all against the dope
smokers and they think the dope smokers
are all communists
and she said yeah well the the um the
mafia and the cia are in cahoots anyway
you all know
everybody knows that and i like that
inca hoots because i realized she had
found the
that was the right word in old ladies
language like the american east
i was always saying mafia and cia have a
working relationship but this
it's not quite it's you know it's too
it's sort of like for the new york times
but it wouldn't do it on jukeboxer
it wouldn't convince an old lady in
peoria
so when she said in cahoots i realized i
had the poem where i had some
you know there was finally the verbal
key that would unlock
the riddle so this is relating to how do
you deal with all this material
in the right language how do you present
it on the page
how to be announced over loudspeakers
cia and mafia and cahoots had to be said
in old ladies language
how to be said in american headlines
kennedy stretched and smiled and got
double-crossed by low-life goons and
agents rich bankers with criminal
connections
dope pushers in cia working with dope
pushers from cuba
working with big time syndicate tampa
florida
had to be said with big mouth well i
want a footnote here
this being 1975 march 17th 1977
the guy i had in mind was a guy named
santos trafficante
who lives in tampa florida working with
big time syndicate tampa florida
traffic cathy was interesting to me
because in the
research i did on cia involvement with
indochina
turns out that trafficante who had been
a big
head of narcotics trafficking in cuba
had been kicked out by castro with the
rest of the
prostitution gambling and narcotics
people was in saigon in 1968
at the caravel hotel for a big
conference to
divide up the opium traffic and he was
like a known
uh narcotics pusher so how did he ever
get into saigon
without this you know under u.s control
what was he thinking at the biggest
hotel in saigon at a big conference
reported publicly
and how could he get away with this
unless the cia was somehow involved or
had some complicity or there was some
relationship
because otherwise because i remember
there were lots of newsmen who couldn't
get into saigon and people were always
being plucked out of saigon and those
who were protesting the war so how could
a big time
gangster dope pusher begins saigon
and it it actually the information about
him being in saigon came from
colonel lucian konin who was a big cia
agent
in um saigon from 61 on
and who knew all the the italian
dope connections and who knew all the
local dope connections and
i was part of familiar with the old
french intelligence agency which
used to support itself by sale of heroin
so then conan and the cia knew that
santos traffic county was there so
what was going on anyway so it struck me
so i wrote big time
dope pushers and cia working with dope
pushers from cuba
working with big time syndicate tampa
florida that's
success that's 1975. march 17th 1977
ap washington santos trafficante a sole
survivor of three u.s
underworld figures who plotted with the
cia against fidel castro
declined to answer any questions
wednesday from the house committee on
assassinations
including whether he discussed plans to
murder president john f kennedy
quote did you ever discuss with any
individual plans to assassinate
president kennedy
prior to his assassination chief counsel
richard a sprague asked
traficanthy a former gambling figure in
cuba refused to answer that and the 13
other questions putin
evoking constitutional provisions
including the fifth amendment privilege
against
self-incrimination traffic county
refused to say if jack ruby the man who
killed lee harvey oswald had once
visited
him when he was in prison in havana cuba
and he refused to say if he
was involved in cia assassination plots
against castro
or whether any federal agency had tried
to keep him from testifying before the
house committee
traffic county was one of three
underworld figures involved in the cia
assassination plots against castro
the other two john rosselli and sam
giancana were murdered after the senate
intelligence committee sought their
testimony two years ago
rosselli was assassinated after
testifying and jan connor was killed
right before he was scheduled to testify
sprague also asked traffic county as if
he had ever met with cia representatives
to discuss assassination of world
leaders including fidel castro
it is said the senate intelligence
committee said two years ago that
roselle giancana and traffic county were
recruited by the cia
to have castro assassinated it has said
traffic county lined up an assassin in
one of the plots to put poison in
castro's food at a havana restaurant
so it was just interesting to get it all
locked in in one
figure to get all my paranoia rolled
into one knot
well rich bankers with criminal
connections dope pushers and cia working
with dope pushers from cuba
working with dope big time syndicate
tampa florida
had to be said with big mouth how to be
moaned over factory fog horns
had to be chattered on car radio news
broadcast had to be screamed in the
kitchen
had to be yelled in the basement where
uncles were fighting had to be howled on
the streets by news boys to bus
conductors
had to be foghorned into new york harbor
how to echo under hard hats
had to turn up the volume in university
ballrooms had to be written in library
books
footnoted had to be in headlines of the
times and demoned
had to be barked over tv how to be heard
inside alleys through bar
room doors had to be playing on wire
services had to be bells ringing
comedians stopped dead in the middle of
a joke in las vegas
had to be fbi chief j.e hoover and frank
costello
syndicate mouthpiece meeting in central
park together weekends in new york
reported posthumously time magazine had
to be mafia and cia together started war
on cuba bay of pigs and poison
assassination headlines
had to be the dope cops in the mafia
sold all that heroin in america
had to be fbi and organized crime
working together in cahoots
against the commies who let lucky
luciano out of jail
take over sicily mediterranean drug
trade
had it because it couldn't goons in
office strategic services pay
busted 1948 dock strikes in marseille
60s port transshipment indochina heroin
had to be ringing on multinational cash
registers worldwide laundry for
organized criminal money
had to be cia and mafia and fbi together
bigger than nixon
bigger than the war had to be a gorge
throat full of murder
how to be mouth and ass a solid mass of
rage
a red hot head a scream in the back of
the throat
had to be in kissinger's brain had to be
in rockefeller's
mouth had to be central intelligence the
family
our thing the agency mafia
organized crime fbi dope cops and
multinational corporations
one big set of criminal gangs working
together in cahoots
hit men murderers everywhere outraged on
the make
secret drunk brutal dirty rich
on top of a slag heap of prisons
industrial cancer
plutonium smog garbage cities
grandmas bed sores father's resentments
had to be the rulers wanted law and
order they got rich on
wanted protection status quo wanted
junkies wanted attica
wanted kent state wanted war in
indochina
had to be cia and mafia and fbi the
multinational capitalists strong arms
squads
private detective agencies for the very
rich and their armies navies and air
force bombing planes
how to be capitalism the vortex of this
rage
this competition man to man horses heads
in the capo's beds
turf and rumbles hit men gang
wars across oceans cambodia bombing to
settle score when
soviet pilots manned egyptian fighter
planes
chile's red democracy bumped off with
white house pots and
pans a warning to mediterranean
governments
secret police embraced for decades nkvd
and cia keep each other secrets
ogpu and dia never hit their own
kgb and fbi one mind brute force
worldwide and full of money how to be
rich
had to be powerful had a higher
technology from harvard
had a murder in indonesia half million
had a murder in indochina two million
had a murder in czechoslovakia had a
murder in chile
had a murder in russia and a murder in
america
well that was sort of like a summary of
all of my research and paranoia
in one sort of spurt with the the
problem
of getting the right language like hada
had had a hadda had to be flash
the daily like the daily double and i
was had to get through somehow
the dick tracy comic strip to make it
because the dick tracy comic strip is
just sort of like the reverse sort of
controlled by the fbi
how do you get it through in such clear
language
that it becomes sloganesque and people
can remember
how do you put all the data together
because there's a good deal of data in
there i'm in this
business of traffic county in tampa
florida
uh or um
fbi chief j.e hoover and frank costello
syndicate mouthpiece meeting in central
park together weekends in new york
reported posthumously time magazine
it's one line so how do you get it
pretty how do you make it pretty
or how to be corsican goons in office
strategic services pay busted 1948 dock
strikes in marseilles
60s port transit indochina heroin
you know to get all the my own
associations
and combinations and uh together how do
you do it in a line that's pretty enough
that
that's not so pretty that one
um the one i liked was
gang wars across oceans cambodia bombed
to settle square when cambodia bombing
to settle
cambodia bombed to settle the score when
soviet pilots manned egyptian fighter
planes
that's actually a surrealist line it
means pure surrealism cambodia bombed to
settle the score
when soviet pilots manned egyptian
fighter planes
i don't know what it sounds like to
anyone now you know whether it makes
sense
but someone reading carefully has some
political science well that's an odd
statement to make i wonder what
authority there is to say that
and the authority actually is ellsberg
quoting kissinger
in 1970. ellsberg said kissinger told
him that he bombed cambodia
as a warning to the russians because the
russians had sent fighter pilots
to man their soviet-built planes which
is against the ground rules
of their turf they had their turf and
they were having a rumble and this was
like you go hit the man across across
town
chile's red democracy bumped off with
white house pots and pans
a warning to mediterranean governments
uh the
kissinger said the reason they had gone
in on chile was a warning to the italian
communist party not to try and get
take part in the government they didn't
want to happen in europe
those two pieces of information i got
directly from ellsberg
in conversation he
describing information or discussions he
had with kissinger back in 70 before he
quit
yeah yeah yeah the uh the the strategy
behind
knocking off the chilean government
aside from general anti-communism aside
from
fear of communist takeover in south
america was
that well the chileans got
elected the
reds got elected in chile and there were
going to be elections in
greater portugal and in italy and in
france
and uh it looked like it does look like
the communist universe will get elected
at least enough to take part in the
government and the crucial matter will
be when they get
elected with sufficient power to take
part
in the security departments
that is to say the secret police the
intelligence departments the nerve
center
well that's where that's where all the
crux is actually
are they going to have you know if they
take part in the government will they
get the police or not
because whoever gets the police and the
secret police and the intelligence they
got the ball game
which was actually the secret of the
russian invasion
of czechoslovakia in 1968 that the
liberals
in the czech government had apparently
uh gotten so much power that the next
day they were going to take the
over the offices of the interior
ministry the secret police
where the files were
that showed that the secret police until
that time had been controlled by the
moscow secret place
and that all the killings and
assassinations and jailings
from the late 40s on in czechoslovakia
were ordered from moscow which would
have been a major scandal which
would have rocked the whole communist
world if that had come out there would
be like a big watergate there
so the tanks rolled in to prevent the
that information i got from a guy named
joseph varesky
who was like a great novelist who had to
flee in 68.
and his friends told him that was the
crucial point
so it's the crucial point in all this in
a way in investigative poetics is
intelligence
it's sort of like the poets and their
intelligence versus the secret police
and their intelligence and who's writing
the better poem
or who's writing the more the more
exquisite
prose or the more interesting um
strategy total assault on the culture
but so now i'd like to
move on to some samples of pros by the
intelligence agencies
these are documents under the freedom of
information act
as background to this i should also say
that in 1970
1960 60 or 62
i don't know what the proper citation is
j edgar hoover got up in um
at a i think the republican convention
and said that the three biggest threats
to america were the communists
the beatniks and the eggheads actually
said that
the eggheads well la stevenson
the eggheads were sort of uh [ __ ]
proto-communists i guess
intellectuals who didn't do any work and
fancy pants uh a fancy pants was a fancy
pants intellectuals was joseph
mccarthy's phrase
for people who weren't macho enough to
want a big army and fight the communists
or something
anyway so they're always then uh hoover
apparently as early as 65 there was this
operation cointel
cointelpro counterintelligence program
aimed at many many different groups
i think it probably i don't have much on
it but i think it probably included the
beatniks as a formal
organized counterintelligence matter
i don't have any papers on it but um i
sooner or later i think it'll be enough
research or research will show
that the fbi or the federal
police the fbi probably collected as
much
scandalous information as they could
from local newspapers or local police
things like
bearded hippie staff's grandmother in
iowa farmhouse or whatever and took as
many of those stories as they could
and made sure they were circulated all
over the united states to give an
image of bearded unwashed
bed bug ridden hairy murderous beatniks
i think that was actually literally
organized
but i don't have any papers on that to
prove it but
there were on many other groups
vast organizations more overtly
political people
like uh hoover was involved
in uh making sure that the charisma of
many
black writers and organizers and
spokesman were
was stained so he went on a giant
campaign against
leroy jones stokely carmichael martin
luther king
eldridge cleaver and anybody that any
artist or anybody that got mixed up with
them
so here are some papers on uh to begin
with on leroy jones
this is 1970. the program maybe reached
its climax
at 70. fbi date 11 1370
via airtel to the director of fbi
144 8006 from sac newark
i don't know what the strategic command
in newark or
strategic aircraft no it's sac is a
local local fbi office in newark
subject co-intel pro black extremist rm
the following counterintelligence
proposal is submitted for consideration
it is recommended that a letter be sent
with the jersey city new jersey postmark
to leroy jones at 502 high street newark
new jersey and the newark new jersey
newspapers
consideration might be also given to
wider distribution it should be signed
ministry of information black panther
party jersey city new jersey
the letter should read similarly to the
following leroy jones the podo calls
himself amiri baraka is tom pig
pretending to be a true black
revolutionary
he asked people not to buy the black
panther newspaper because he wanted
people's money for himself
jones uses the people's liberation soul
power to line his pockets
his heavies threatened panthers selling
papers and people trying to buy them
now jones tries to put himself on a
throne like maybe you saw his picture
he fancies himself the reason ken gibson
got elected mayor of newark
jones had visions of his throne in
newark than the whole country then the
world
jones is shoving his congress of african
people idea down the throats of brothers
and sisters on high street
he hustles them as religion to make them
his slaves he thinks he's black jesus
and he should be put on his own cross
even africans left at baraka's homemade
dashikis in new york
when will the black people of newark
wake up and see jones baraka is just
playing his king role and they're his
pawns
unquote in connection with the above
suggested letter a copy should be sent
with a return address of 502 high street
newark new jersey
to been eliminated
blacked out one line blacked out though
through the the papers or even if the
papers will not print the letter as if
it were smuggled out of newark by a
loyal cap member within jones
organization who agrees with this letter
has pointed out that the conflict
between the black panther party and
jones has risen
and fallen over a period of years this
letter attempts to take advantage of the
currently renewed conflict endangered by
jones anti-black panther propaganda
to both belittle jones and to expose the
panthers resentment of jones
then from
sac to newark
let's see yeah
yeah then no the answer
to essays in newark from director fbi
november 19 1970 cointelpro
black extremist racial matters your
counterintelligence proposal regarding
leroy jones and the black panther party
is approved
ensure that the letter sent cannot be
traced to the bureau advise the bureau
of all positive results from this
proposal
copy to san francisco and note and on
these replies
generally hoover's office gives an
analysis leroy jones the black extremist
poet and playwright who helped elect
kenneth gibson the black mayor of new
jersey has been in conflict with the
black extremist
black panther party for some time jones
has been known as the black messiah of
the pan-african movement in the united
states
newark has proposed a letter to joan's
side ministry of information black
panther party jersey city new jersey
attacking jones as an uncle tom
is using the black people of newark for
his own purpose copies of the letter
will also be sent to newark newspapers
and the letter the chairman of the
congress of african people in which
jones is now active in a leadership role
this proposal will cause disruption not
only within jones's group but also
in the black panther party since jones
has an appreciable following in new
jersey who will resent this statement
then from
from newark to washington attached for
the file is a xerox copy of the approved
letter send out on this date
to the newark evening news in the newark
stark ledger star ledger in newark new
jersey and to leroy jones
502 high street and to the hudson
dispatch jersey city union city
and then the letter read finally
uh well more classes i read it leroy
jones the poet calls himself a myriad
barack is tom pig pretending
comma to be a true black revolutionary
period he asked people not to buy the
black panthers newspaper because
comma he wanted real good pros i mean it
was right from the street
he wants he wants the people's money for
himself
comma jones used the people's money for
liberation sole power to line his
pockets
period his goons threatened threatened
t-r-t-h-r-e-t-a-n
his goons threatened panthers selling
papers and people
papers come and people come trying to
buy them
be why spell buy them be what
now joe's trying to put himself on a
throne like maybe you saw his picture
he fancies himself the reason ken gibson
got elected mayor of newark
jones had visions of ruling newark and
the whole country then the world and so
forth
same thing so that was all sent out and
done
now what's interesting about that plot
within plot
because jones was a very interesting
figure and a great figure because he was
in the literary world
maybe the precursor of ed sanders in
terms of literary activity
mimograph homemade cultural
newspaper and magazine publication
in 5859 jones had
a magazine called ugin and was hanging
around with
kerouac and corso and peter alofsky and
myself and frank o'hara and
kenneth koch at the cedar bar in new
york
and was the one central figure
uniting all the different schools of
poetry in one magazine more effectively
than ever green review or the chicago
review
which were also doing that plus jones
was uniting all of us with the black
groups
with the black musicians like albert
eller and
don cherry and
i think elvin jones was around there and
uh but he would have parties where don
cherry and ornette coleman
and um cecil terror would play
and it would be mixed with all the
painters like de kooning and franz klein
and a kerouac and corso and myself
and a b spellman and a whole bunch of
black writers
plus o'hara plus people from
partisan review so it was he had the
greatest salon in newark
and it was like an era of good feeling
and a fantastically well-organized
social scene
resulting in
cultural activity that really cr that
really was powerful
and because it was an unbeatable
combination all those people
uh when malcolm x got killed
apparently malcolm x had told jones that
he would have to take over
in case anything happened to him malcolm
x himself had told jones that he would
have to take over certain spiritual or
cultural leadership
and jones at that time was you know a
funny guy
literary you know grabbing peter's [ __ ]
at parties and
you know smoking a lot of grass and even
shooting a little junk and lots of
cocaine and
writing poems and seeing himself as
somewhat be a beat poet but an aesthetic
person and also a student uh visiting
miura roshi who was a zen master in new
york that
gary snyder had worked with and trained
in english so jones was right in the
middle of all that and all of a sudden
there was this traumatic
assassination of malcolm x plus threats
of assassination to jones so jones got
completely paranoid
and moved away from from the
white community and began getting scared
of them
then the fbi
made all sorts of similar poison pen
letters so the jones was separated out
from the radical group of
i think was tom hayden who's organizing
with sds in newark
so the jones denounced tom hayden and
further isolated himself
then jones got into involvement with uh
with
a black nationalist theoretician
ron karenga in uh at ucla
have anybody heard of him the u.s group
it's called
ron karenga the u.s group ucla
who were also in a fight with the
panthers in fact several people got
murdered panthers got murdered
at ucla by ron karenga's u.s group
karenga's view unlike the panthers
and unlike jones's previous view was
that the blacks would have to make it
themselves without any white help
that black and white cultural mixture
was a mistake
that the blacks had to find their own
macho or their own balls
that white leadership would always
betray them by
white hunky liberal leadership was a was
would soften the scene that it was
really
power goes out of the barrel of a gun
you couldn't have the barrel of a gun
unless you had a unified community
you wouldn't have a unified community
unless it was community of the really
oppressed
the only really oppressed people were
the blacks the blacks should identify
with themselves and not with the white
liberal middle class hippie
revolutionary or
white communists and the blacks should
identify with african culture
and there so there would be total
separation leroy jones should not talk
to alan ginsberg
everything should get really paranoid
well so from 1965 to 1970
jones was getting intellectual
advisement and
ideas a very brilliant nature like this
from ron karenga
then in december last year i went to
hollywood to do some
buddhist work and played at the uh
did a show at the nightclub called the
troubadour and i ran into
[Music]
ronnie blakely a singer who was a star
of nashville
who i spent time with on the rolling
thunder review
and she said which surprised me that she
had been a big radical during the 60s
and had hung around with weathermen and
people from the sds
and it turned out that her boyfriend who
had been
[ __ ] her all through the 60s in the
sds had later turned out to be an agent
and then after he was unmasked as an
agent he kept calling her up one and
have not more dates
so she being very intelligent said well
where is his head anyway
she said yes i'll go out and find out so
he took her out to
a party full of fbi agents and who was
there but ron karinga
so i said what so then i then
then i saw roy in january in new york
he had meanwhile changed his view and
had become a
marxist leninist stalinist maoist
uh uh it was the idea that he was wrong
in the 60s that actually
the white and black oppressed had to
work together that the problem was
capitalism
not race or that greed of capitalism
was not necessarily a racial matter but
was a problem an economic problem so it
was a marxist interpretation
so he was now willing to work with
everybody
uh and i told him and his wife that
story about ronnie
blakely and he said yeah they had some
suspicions about that his wife said that
long ago they broke him with karenga
thinking that there was something funny
about him he might be an agent
though she said that for five years they
were basically working with him and
getting ideas and information and
direction intellectual direction and
social direction from karenga
then i saw an underground newspaper a
little item from january
like one of these pages saying um
uh use the u.s group and ron karenga as
a
as a group to split black from black
black group from black group
fight panthers from panthers from jones
and
panthers from the u.s movement um
so apparently the the the that group was
specific that was
so to speak influencing
jones who was like a giant intellectual
and poetic and spiritual and cultural
leader
he was being influenced by karenga who
was being manipulated by the fbi
and then the whether or not he was an
actual agent is unsure because i
then went to les whitton who works with
jack anderson to see if he had any
information and his information was that
karenga was just a clown publicity hound
who would do anything and would probably
work with the fbi but was not a paid
agent so what's the upshot
the upshot is that the entire cultural
history of the 60s would have to be
rewritten
because one of the major events of the
60s was the black white paranoia
the split of the whole movement which
apparently was engineered by the
government
see now all the radical radicals on the
left were saying uh right on bro
that these blacks are absolutely right
you know they're
it was that i guess the white liberal
guilt that made people feel that it was
not realizing insensitivity and
inhumanity of separating white from
black or separating brother from brother
or the tearfulness of not being able to
relate to leroy jones after a while
on a literary if not a social
scene so that um
investigative poetics i think
at this point would have to go into the
whole
cultural and social and poetic and
artistic history
of the 60s which is quite a vast
traumatic
revolutionary time and re-investigate
a great many things that happened of an
intellectual symbolic nature to find out
what was the story behind it
because a great deal more of it was
manipulated than we realized and
one of the major things that was
manipulated was a split between the
psychedelic movement and the political
that is between leery say and
[Music]
cleaver among other things uh and that
was done according to leary and
according to cleaver
though i haven't yet seen the papers on
it but i heard both from
i've heard from leary and i've seen it
in underground papers
and i understand there was a story in
rolling stone in october
76 to the effect that
when leary escaped was helped by the
weatherman to escape from
vacaville prison in california or
wherever he was
on his 20-year
sentence for possession of
a joint
he was then sent off to algiers to take
take uh refuge with eldridge cleaver
now do you any of you remember that that
larry went to algiers after this game
when does anybody not remember that
here it's all right if you don't because
it's over 10 years ago now frankly
seven years and you were 12 years old
so and then do you remember that cleaver
arrested leary
and put him under house arrest there's
anybody that doesn't remember that
there was a conflict there and cleaver
took leary and put him in house arrest
and said
leary was too loud-mouthed and he was
talking with fbi agents
in the cafes of algeria and he wasn't he
was too frivolous and
like he was he was going to be part of a
better ser she's going to be part of the
world revolution you better hear the
clang of iron and uh then everybody was
shocked
because what it meant was well [ __ ]
leary and elderly cleaver a bunch of
egotists can't even get along or
was it mean the psychedelic and the
political or irreconcilable there was
these fancy headed psychedelic people
wanting visions and
realistic gun-toting political people
power comes out of the barrel of a gun
and we thought we had them together but
it wasn't together in fact
leary's lawyer boasted when he
left jail boasted in the
berkeley barb that it was the true merit
of dope and dynamite
and literally left with the weatherman
and then there's this de numa
in algiers where they're fighting among
themselves
and so michael zueron of the village
voice went over there and made a tv
video tape of the two of them arguing
which ran for two separate issues in the
village voice
it was like a classic left-wing
movement intellectual poetry psychedelic
scandal
that they couldn't get along and they
were suspicious of each other and what
kind of revolution was this and
who was on whose side and was leary
wrong was cleveland wrong
so ad all boils down to the fact that
the fbi forged one of these letters from
the black panthers in new york
ordering cleaver to arrest leary as a
spy
which which information only surfaced
when leary
and cleaver both together in jail had
thanksgiving
supper i think it was in 75 and began
comparing notes